### 2021-02-04 [G A]

##### [Living with Neighbors. III. The Origin of the Spin$-$Orbit Alignment of Galaxy Pairs: A Neighbor versus the Large-scale Structure](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01701) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.01701.pdf)

- Recent observations revealed a coherence between the spin vector of a galaxy and the orbital motion of its neighbors.
- We refer to the phenomenon as "the spin$-$orbit alignment (SOA)" and explore its physical origin via the IllustrisTNG simulation.
- This is the first study to utilize a cosmological hydrodynamic simulation to investigate the SOA of galaxy pairs.
- In particular, we identify paired galaxies at $z = 0$ having the nearest neighbor with mass ratios from 1/10 to 10 and calculate the spin$-$orbit angle for each pair.
- Our results are as follows.
- (a) There exists a clear preference for prograde orientations (i.e., SOA) for galaxy pairs, qualitatively consistent with observations.
- (b) The SOA is significant for both baryonic and dark matter spins, being the strongest for gas and the weakest for dark matter.
- (c) The SOA is stronger for less massive targets and for targets having closer neighbors.
- (d) The SOA strengthens for galaxies in low-density regions, and the signal is dominated by central$-$satellite pairs in low-mass halos.
- (e) There is an explicit dependence of the SOA on the duration of interaction with its current neighbor.
- Taken together, we propose that the SOA witnessed at $z = 0$ has been developed mainly by interactions with a neighbor for an extended period of time, rather than tidal torque from the ambient large-scale structure.

##### [Early Science from POSSUM: Shocks, turbulence, and a massive new reservoir of ionised gas in the Fornax cluster](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01702) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.01702.pdf)

- We present the first Faraday rotation measure (RM) grid study of an individual low-mass cluster -- the Fornax cluster -- which is presently undergoing a series of mergers.
- Exploiting commissioning data for the POlarisation Sky Survey of the Universe's Magnetism (POSSUM) covering a $\sim34$ square degree sky area using the Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder (ASKAP), we achieve an RM grid density of $\sim25$ RMs per square degree from a 280 MHz band centred at 887 MHz, which is similar to expectations for forthcoming GHz-frequency all-sky surveys.
- We thereby probe the extended magnetoionic structure of the cluster in unprecedented detail.
- We find that the scatter in the Faraday RM of confirmed background sources is increased by $16.8\pm2.4$ rad m$^{-2}$ within 1 degree (360 kpc) projected distance to the cluster centre, which is 2--4 times more extended than the presently-detectable X-ray-emitting intracluster medium (ICM).
- The Faraday-active plasma is more massive than the X-ray-emitting ICM, with an average density that broadly matches expectations for the Warm-Hot Intergalactic Medium.
- The morphology of the Faraday depth enhancement exhibits the classic morphology of an astrophysical bow shock on the southwest side of the main Fornax cluster, and an extended, swept-back wake on the northeastern side.
- Our favoured explanation is an ongoing merger between the main cluster and a sub-cluster to the southwest.
- The shock's Mach angle and stand-off distance lead to a self-consistent transonic merger speed with Mach 1.06.
- The region hosting the Faraday depth enhancement shows a decrement in both total and polarised intensity.
- We fail to identify a satisfactory explanation for this; further observations are warranted.
- Generally, our study illustrates the scientific returns that can be expected from all-sky grids of discrete sources generated by forthcoming all-sky radio surveys.

##### [Substructure at High Speed I: Inferring the Escape Velocity in the Presence of Kinematic Substructure](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01704) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.01704.pdf)

- The local escape velocity provides valuable inputs to the mass profile of the Galaxy, and requires understanding the tail of the stellar speed distribution.
- Following Leonard $\&$ Tremaine (1990), various works have since modeled the tail of the stellar speed distribution as $\propto (v_{\rm{esc}} -v)^k$, where $v_{\rm{esc}}$ is the escape velocity, and $k$ is the slope of the distribution.
- In such studies, however, these two parameters were found to be largely degenerate and often a narrow prior is imposed on $k$ in order to constrain $v_{\rm{esc}}$.
- Furthermore, the validity of the power law form is likely to break down in the presence of multiple kinematic substructures.
- In this paper, we introduce a strategy that for the first time takes into account the presence of kinematic substructure.
- We model the tail of the velocity distribution as a sum of multiple power laws without imposing strong priors.
- Using mock data, we show the robustness of this method in the presence of kinematic structure that is similar to the recently-discovered Gaia Sausage.
- In a companion paper, we present the new measurement of the escape velocity and subsequently the mass of the Milky Way using Gaia DR2 data.

##### [APOGEE discovery of a chemically atypical star disrupted from NGC 6723 and captured by the Milky Way bulge](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01706) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.01706.pdf)

- The central ('bulge') region of the Milky Way is teeming with a significant fraction of mildly metal-deficient stars with atmospheres that are strongly enriched in cyanogen ($^{12}$C$^{14}$N).
- Some of these objects, which are also known as nitrogen-enhanced stars, are hypothesised to be relics of the ancient assembly history of the Milky Way.
- Although the chemical similarity of nitrogen-enhanced stars to the unique chemical patterns observed in globular clusters has been observed, a direct connection between field stars and globular clusters has not yet been proven.
- In this work, we report on high-resolution, near-infrared spectroscopic observations of the bulge globular cluster NGC 6723, and the serendipitous discovery of a star, 2M18594405$-$3651518, located outside the cluster (near the tidal radius) but moving on a similar orbit, providing the first clear piece of evidence of a star that was very likely once a cluster member and has recently been ejected.
- Its nitrogen abundance ratio ([N/Fe]$\gtrsim + 0.94$) is well above the typical Galactic field-star levels, and it exhibits noticeable enrichment in the heavy $s$-process elements (Ce, Nd, and Yb), along with moderate carbon enrichment; all characteristics are known examples in globular clusters.
- This result suggests that some of the nitrogen-enhanced stars in the bulge likely originated from the tidal disruption of globular clusters.

##### [Monte Carlo simulations of multiple populations in globular clusters: constraints on the cooling flow vs. accretion scenario using million bodies simulations](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01707) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.01707.pdf)

- I simulate the evolution of a stellar system hosting two stellar populations whose initial set up is defined according to the two main scenarios proposed for the origin of multiple populations in Galactic globular clusters: (i) formation of a second generation from a cooling flow of pristine+polluted gas and (ii) accretion of polluted gas onto the proto-stellar disks of a fraction of low-mass stars.
- For this purpose, Monte Carlo simulations containing from $10^{5}$ up to $3\cdot 10^{6}$ particles have been run including the effect of stellar evolution, binary interactions, external tidal field and a detailed modelling of the proto-stellar disk structure.
- The early accretion of gas onto proto-stellar disks is unable to produce discrete populations and to alter the chemical composition of a significant ($>10\%$) fraction of stars unless a disk lifetime larger ($t_{disk}\sim20~Myr$) than that predicted by models is assumed.
- Moreover, in this scenario the mixing timescale of the two populations is too short to reproduce the observed segregation of the chemically enriched population.
- On the other hand, simulations run within the cooling flow scenario can evolve after a Hubble time into stellar systems with a first-to-second population mass ratio similar to that observed in globular clusters, provided that an initial filling-factor $r_{h}/r_{J}>0.15$ is adopted.
- However, in the weak tidal field regime a radial segregation of the second population stronger than what observed in Milky Way globular clusters at large Galactocentric distances is predicted.
- This discrepancy disappears in simulations following eccentric orbits in a realistic axisymmetric potential.

##### [The Galactic Faraday rotation sky 2020](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01709) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.01709.pdf)

- This work gives an update to existing reconstructions of the Galactic Faraday rotation sky by processing almost all Faraday rotation data sets available at the end of the year 2020.
- Observations of extra-Galactic sources in recent years have, among other regions, further illuminated the previously under-constrained southern celestial sky, as well as parts of the inner disc of the Milky Way.
- This has culminated in an all-sky data set of 55,190 data points, which is a significant expansion on the 41,330 used in previous works, hence making an updated separation of the Galactic component a promising venture.
- The increased source density allows us to present our results in a resolution of about $1.3\cdot 10^{-2} \mathrm{deg}^2$ ($46.8 \mathrm{arcmin}^2$), which is a twofold increase compared to previous works.
- As for previous Faraday rotation sky reconstructions, this work is based on information field theory, a Bayesian inference scheme for field-like quantities which handles noisy and incomplete data.
- In contrast to previous reconstructions, we find a significantly thinner and pronounced Galactic disc with small-scale structures exceeding values of several thousand $\mathrm{rad} \mathrm{m}^{-2}$.
- The improvements can mainly be attributed to the new catalog of Faraday data, but are also supported by advances in correlation structure modeling within numerical information field theory.
- We furthermore give a detailed discussion on statistical properties of the Faraday rotation sky and investigate correlations to other data sets.

##### [Probing the Halo Gas Distribution in the Inner Galaxy with Fermi Bubble Observations](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01710) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.01710.pdf)

- The hot halo gas distribution in the inner Milky Way (MW) contains key fossil records of the past energetic feedback processes in the Galactic center, such as the Fermi and eROSITA bubbles.
- Here we adopt a variety of spherical and disk-like MW halo gas models as initial conditions in a series of simulations to investigate the formation of the Fermi bubbles in the jet-shock scenario.
- The simulation results are compared directly with relevant observations of the Fermi bubbles to constrain the halo gas distribution in the inner Galaxy before the Fermi bubble event.
- Our best-fit gas density distribution can be described by a power law in radius $n_{\rm e}(r)=0.01(r/1 \text{~kpc})^{-1.5}$ cm$^{-3}$.
- Our study can not determine if there is an inner density core, which if exists, should be very small with size $r_{c} \lesssim 0.5$ kpc.
- When extrapolating to large radii $r\sim 50-90$ kpc, our derived density distribution lies appreciably below the recently estimated gas densities from ram-pressure stripping calculations, suggesting that the halo gas density profile either flattens out or has one or more discontinuities within $10 \lesssim r \lesssim 50$ kpc.
- Our derived gas density profile may correspond to the hot gas distribution in the inner 10-kpc region of the eROSITA bubbles about $5$ Myr ago.

##### [Dynamical Evolution of Multiple-Population Globular Clusters](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01717) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.01717.pdf)

- We have carried out a set of Monte Carlo simulations to study a number of fundamental aspects of the dynamical evolution of multiple stellar populations in globular clusters with different initial masses, fractions of second generation (2G) stars, and structural properties.
- Our simulations explore and elucidate: 1) the role of early and long-term dynamical processes and stellar escape in the evolution of the fraction of 2G stars and the link between the evolution of the fraction of 2G stars and various dynamical parameters; 2) the link between the fraction of 2G stars inside the cluster and in the population of escaping stars during a cluster's dynamical evolution; 3) the dynamics of the spatial mixing of the first-generation (1G) and 2G stars and the details of the structural properties of the two populations as they evolve toward mixing; 4) the implications of the initial differences between the spatial distribution of 1G and 2G stars for the evolution of the anisotropy in the velocity distribution and the expected radial profile of the 1G and 2G anisotropy for clusters at different stages of their dynamical history; 5) the variation of the degree of energy equipartition of the 1G and the 2G populations as a function of the distance from the cluster's centre and the cluster's evolutionary phase.

##### [The AMBRE Project: Origin and evolution of sulfur in the Milky Way](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01961) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.01961.pdf)

- Sulfur is a volatile chemical element that plays an important role in tracing the chemical evolution of galaxies.
- However, its nucleosynthesis origin and abundance variations are still unclear.
- The goal of the present article is to accurately and precisely study the S-content of large number of stars located in the solar neighbourhood.
- We use the parametrisation of thousands of HR stellar spectra provided by the AMBRE Project, and combine it with the automated abundance determination GAUGUIN to derive LTE sulfur abundances for 1855 slow-rotating FGK-type stars.
- This is the largest and most precise catalogue of S-abundances published to date.
- It covers a metallicity domain as high as ~2.5dex starting at [M/H]~-2.0dex.
- We find that the [S/M] abundances ratio is compatible with a plateau-like distribution in the metal-poor regime, and then starts to decrease continuously at [M/H]~-1.0dex.
- This decrease continues towards negative values for supersolar metallicity stars as recently reported for Mg and as predicted by Galactic chemical evolution models.
- Moreover, sulfur-rich stars having [M/H] in the range [-1.0,-0.5] have very different kinematical and orbital properties with respect to more metal-rich and sulfur-poor ones.
- Two disc components, associated with the thin and thick discs, are thus seen independently in kinematics and sulfur abundances.
- The sulfur radial gradients in the Galactic discs have also been estimated.
- Finally, the enrichment in sulfur with respect to iron is nicely correlated with stellar ages: older metal-poor stars have higher [S/M] ratios than younger metal-rich ones.
- This work has confirmed that sulfur is an alfa-element that could be considered to explore the Galactic populations properties.

##### [Radial structure and formation of the Milky Way disc](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.02082) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.02082.pdf)

- The formation of the Galactic disc is an enthusiastically debated issue.
- Numerous studies and models seek to identify the dominant physical process(es) that shaped its observed properties.
- Taking advantage of the improved coverage of the inner Milky Way provided by the SDSS DR16 APOGEE catalogue and of the ages published in the APOGEE-AstroNN Value Added Catalogue (VAC), we examine the radial evolution of the chemical and age properties of the Galactic stellar disc, with the aim to better constrain its formation.
- Using a sample of 199,307 giant stars with precise APOGEE abundances and APOGEE-astroNN ages, selected in a +/-2 kpc layer around the galactic plane, we assess the dependency with guiding radius of: (i) the median metallicity, (ii) the ridge lines of the [Fe/H]-[Mg/Fe] and age-[Mg/Fe] distributions and (iii) the Age Distribution Function (ADF).
- The giant star sample allows us to probe the radial behaviour of the Galactic disc from Rg = 0 to 14-16 kpc.
- The thick disc [Fe/H]-[Mg/Fe] ridge lines follow closely grouped parallel paths, supporting the idea that the thick disc did form from a well-mixed medium.
- However, the ridge lines present a small drift in [Mg/Fe], which decreases with increasing guiding radius.
- At sub-solar metallicity, the intermediate and outer thin disc [Fe/H]-[Mg/Fe] ridge lines follow parallel sequences shifted to lower metallicity as the guiding radius increases.
- We interpret this pattern, as the signature of a dilution of the inter-stellar medium from Rg~6 kpc to the outskirt of the disc, which occured before the onset of the thin disc formation.
- The APOGEE-AstroNN VAC provides stellar ages for statistically significant samples of thin disc stars from the Galactic centre up to Rg~14 kpc.
- An important result provided by this dataset, is that the thin disc presents evidence of an inside-out formation up to R_g~10-12 kpc.
- (Abridged)

##### [AlFoCS + F3D II: unexpectedly low gas-to-dust ratios in the Fornax galaxy cluster](http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.02148) [(PDF)](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.02148.pdf)

- We combine observations from ALMA, ATCA, MUSE, andHerschel to study gas-to-dust ratios in 15 Fornax cluster galaxies detected in the FIR/sub-mm by Herschel and observed by ALMA as part of the ALMA Fornax Cluster Survey (AlFoCS).
- The sample spans a stellar mass range of 8.3 $\leq$ log (M$_*$ / M$_\odot$) $\leq$ 11.16, and a variety of morphological types.
- We use gas-phase metallicities derived from MUSE observations (from the Fornax3D survey) to study these ratios as a function of metallicity, and to study dust-to-metal ratios, in a sub-sample of nine galaxies.
- We find that gas-to-dust ratios in Fornax galaxies are systematically lower than those in field galaxies at fixed stellar mass/metallicity.
- This implies that a relatively large fraction of the metals in these Fornax systems is locked up in dust, which is possibly due to altered chemical evolution as a result of the dense environment.
- The low ratios are not only driven by HI deficiencies, but H$_2$-to-dust ratios are also significantly decreased.
- This is different in the Virgo cluster, where low gas-to-dust ratios inside the virial radius are driven by low HI-to-dust ratios, while H$_2$-to-dust ratios are increased.
- Resolved observations of NGC1436 show a radial increase in H$_2$-to-dust ratio, and show that low ratios are present throughout the disc.
- We propose various explanations for the low H$_2$-to-dust ratios in the Fornax cluster, including the more efficient stripping of H$_2$ compared to dust, more efficient enrichment of dust in the star formation process, and altered ISM physics in the cluster environment.
